# Introduction to Programming

## Project 1: A Timings Board

### The Problem

At a Formula 1 Grand Prix there is sophisticated timing equipment that automatically records the lap times achieved by the various drivers. Before the actual race there are various practice sessions, when the drivers try to optimise the setup of their cars. The lap times they achieve are obviously of great interest. There is a large screen in front of the main grandstand with a display that informs spectators of how the session is proceeding.

You will create a program that analyses a file generated by the timing system that displays the performance of the current drivers.

#### Specification

*This section is deliberately vague and a little open-ended. You are encouraged to add any additional features that you think might be useful and/or interesting. The only thing you cannot alter is the format of the input files.*

The lap time data will be provided in a file, in a simple format, as follows:

* The first line of the file is the location of the Grand Prix.
* Each following line records time of one driver, over one lap.

The format of a "time line" is:

* The first three characters are a unique code for the driver.
* The remainder of the line is the lap time, which is presented with three decimal places.

Obviously there will probably be more than one line in the file for any given driver.

There can be any number of lines in the file, but the line with the race location is guaranteed to be present (which implies that the file cannot be empty). The other lines are always in the format above.

Your program should accept the name of the file to be processed as a *command-line argument*.

#### Requirements

For a pass, your program should:

1. Process the command-line argument, and behave sensibly if it is missing, the file does not exist, etc.
2. Display the race name using the data from the first line of the file.
3. Display the three-letter code of the driver with the current fastest time. (In the unlikely event that two drivers have exactly the same time, display the first one found.)

To improve on this, your program should:

1. Display the fastest time for *each* driver.
2. Display the average time overall (that is, the average time for all drivers).
3. Display the average time for each driver.

For top marks you should also:

1. Display the listing of fastest times in descending order of times.
2. Add additional details for each driver (such as their real name and/or team name) into the output.
3. Add in any other interesting features that you would like.

#### Files

This folder contains a list of the three letter codes of the current drivers, along with their team names, car numbers, and real names. This could be useful, but it is not guaranteed that there is a time for every driver in the file provided.

There are also three sample data files. These use the driver codes in the file described above.

#### Hints

Use a very short file as you develop. If you want to check your results from the longer file, as a friend to show you their output!

Think carefully about how to store the data. If, say, finding the average for each driver turns out to be very complicated, you are probably not storing the data the best way.

If you attempt the later stages of this project, you need to print a table of results. That can be fiddly. https://pypi.org/project/tabulate/ will help.

A video of a solution running will be posted to MyBeckett.
